---
layout: post
title: Intro to Regular Expressions in Python
---

## A Quick Introduction to Regular Expressions in Python

Regular expressions (regex) are a concise way of matching patterns in strings. You can use regular expressions in Python by importing the _re_ [module](https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html#module-re). There's also a third-party module, _regex_ which is backwards-compatible with the standard _re_ module, but offers additional functionality. 

Regular expressions can match characters with themselves (ie. _a_ matches character 'a' and _Z_ matches the characer 'Z') or can use special metacharacters which are used to match unusual patterns. These are the metacharacters you can use in regex: `. ^ $ * + ? { } [ ] \ | ( )`

### Dot/Period `.`
The dot matches any character except a newline. For example, if you were trying to match the string 'text\n', the regular expression `.....` would return the string 'text' but not the newline character. 

Keep in mind that within the re module if the [DOTALL](https://docs.python.org/2/library/re.html#re.DOTALL) flag has been specified, the dot matches any character including a newline.

### Caret `^`


### Asterisk `*`

### Plus Sign `+`

### Question Mark `?`

### Curly Braces `{ }`

### Character Classes `[ ]`
`[ ]` is used for specifying a set of characters you would like to match (a character class). For example, `[abc]` or `[a-c]` will match any of the lowercase letters _a_, _b_ or _c_. Similarly, `[123]` or `[1-3]` will match any of the characters _1_, _2_ or _3_. Keep in mind that some of the metacharacters won't work within the brackets used to define a character class. You can negate a character class using the carat `^` like this: `[^5]`, which matches all characters except _5_. 

### Backslash `\`
The most useful metacharacter is the backslash `\`, which can be used to escape other metacharacters (eg. `\[` will escape the [) or match special sequences (eg. \w matches any alphanumeric character). Keep in mind that `\` can be used to escape itself (eg. `\\`).

The [Python docs](https://docs.python.org/3/howto/regex.html) list some of the more useful backslash sequences:

* `\d` matches any decimal digit, eg. `[0-9]`
* `\D` matches any non-digit character, eg. `[^0-9]`
* `\s` matches any whitespace character, eg. `[ \t\n\r\f\v]`
* `\S` matches any non-whitespace character, eg. `[^ \t\n\r\f\v]`
* `\w` matches any alphanumeric character, eg. `[a-zA-Z0-9_]`
* `\W` matches any non-alphanumeric character, eg. `[^a-zA-Z0-9_]`

### Pipe `|`

### Parentheses `( )`

### Useful Links

The official Python [documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/howto/regex.html) on regular expressions. 

There's a great site for testing out your regular expressions called [rubular](http://rubular.com/), which is built with Ruby regex in mind, but most match Python's regex language. 
